at first i didn't believe there was a
virus
but when they start taking away your
rights it doesn't make sense
the coronavirus is the biggest threat
this country has faced
for decades if you don't follow the
rules
the police will have the powers to
enforce them
you must stay at home conspiracy
theories about 5g
have been spreading since the beginning
of lockdown there is no virus it's 5g
radiation poisoning this is all a big
part of
the eventual goal which is control your
body can't handle this new 5g
it's not built for it and yet lots more
people are going to be ill
these false theories have been
contagious
bbc news at two o'clock this is nikki
cardwell
police have broken up a group of around
25 people protesting about the lockdown
in central london
[Music]
the demonstration took place near to the
a e units of st
thomas's hospital
fascism fascism fascism
major health organizations have said
that 5g is safe
and that there's absolutely no link
between it and coronavirus
so where did the idea come from and how
far
are its believers prepared to go you're
gonna you're gonna be poisoned
are you gonna are you gonna stand for
that well we're not standing for it it
isn't coronavirus
[Music]
hey how's it going i'm good how are you
yeah i'm good
nice to meet you how much time are you
spending online
i looked at my screen time on my phone i
think it was like
16 hours maybe a day
yeah but it's gone it's gone down now
but at first it was like 16 maybe 17
hours
yeah what did your mom say i wasn't
happy at 4.
isaac is 17 and he's been stuck at home
like the rest of us
he's been living through his phone and
in early april
his friends started sharing something
unusual
someone sent something into my snapchat
group chat you know some guy he was
talking about
how the 5g thing is
that real thing that we should be scared
about not coronavirus and coronavirus is
a cover-up
for a lot of different things that the
government is doing
i was thinking this guy is definitely
bored because it makes no sense
what are your friends thinking they're
thinking about the 5g stuff the
radiation
and it making them sick and whatnot some
of them actually generally believe it
and some of them haven't
they don't they basically don't want to
leave the houses
wow yeah false theories about the virus
and 5g
spread quickly at the beginning of
lockdown
do you think it's difficult to tell
what's
true and what's false in me very very
difficult
i just don't believe i just don't
believe anything to be honest unless i
see it come from
one of boris's speeches the
misinformation that people are spreading
is quite dangerous there isn't one
coherent 5g conspiracy theory
some people say the virus is man-made
and lockdown is a cover for installing
5g
others say it's actually 5g that's
causing coronavirus symptoms
and some think it's an excuse for forced
global vaccination
it all comes back to a fear that 5g is
harmful to human health
there's no credible evidence to support
that
but that hasn't stopped wild speculation
online
and celebrities have been super
spreaders
us singer kerry hilson was one of the
first
she shared this now debunked video of an
alternative doctor in march
and i'll finish with anybody want to
make one guess as to where
the first completely blanketed 5g
city in the world was
exactly kerry later tweeted that her
management asked her to remove the post
what the doctor said wasn't true but the
idea was infectious
and anti-5g posts went viral
on the first day of lockdown mia tweeted
then later removed
this here's the broadband that they're
like digging up to install
why are these men here
then callum best put a post on instagram
so did lee ryan from boy band blue
like so many of these posts it's since
been deleted
then hollywood actor woody harrelson
[Music]
these messages were coming up on all of
our feeds and they weren't stopping
amanda holden said she accidentally
tweeted a link to this petition
but four hours after she shared it the
page had over a hundred and twenty
thousand signatures
bbc news at 8 o'clock there's been
another record increase in the number of
deaths
i think it's a man made thing
guys it's been put there for a reason to
keep everyone in
while they test the 5g
amongst his usual posts british musician
black the ripper was sharing anti-5g
[Music]
for allowing videos to come in
then he died rest in peace ripper
and respect for speaking the truth
before you died
it fueled even more conspiracy theories
by the end of the first week of april
fake news was everywhere
and the government decided to step in on
the point about the 5g
masters the stories i have got about
that
they play a role in the in the spread of
the disease that's just nonsense
dangerous nonsense as well
[Music]
with all the misinformation swirling
around it's easy to lose sight of what
5g
actually is david robert grimes
is a physicist and cancer researcher
hello how are you doing hey i'm doing
great how are you
5g is essentially a new standard in
mobile technology
one of the things that people correctly
realize is that this is a form of
radiation
radiation is scary people are frightened
of that word
there are forms of radiation that are
very very dangerous
but what people forget is light is also
a form of radiation
5g is tens of thousands of times
less energetic than even the visible
light to which we
are exposed every day but i think it's
really important to work out that a lot
of your conspiracy theories being spread
at the moment
are actually not even new there was
people against 4g there's there's groups
against wi-fi
and back in the 1910s there was people
against radio
what has changed now is not that these
fringe groups have existed they always
have
but now they can harness the power of
social media to go and spread their
beliefs and to evangelize them
and because we live in a world where we
use technology but we don't always
understand what it really means or how
it works
we are very susceptible to frightening
claims
when i heard the word 5g i just for
holding here we go
naveed works for bt open reach a lady
approached my van
she said i know what you're here for i
know what you're doing you've been hired
by the council
to basically roll out 5g
he installs home internet and phone
lines not mobile networks like 5g
but he's been targeted just like other
engineers
one day in april a woman approached him
quoting false information
it made no sense to me as well about
microwaves and
blood cells and how it affects everyone
she walked further further across the
shop and probably about 10 meters down
there was a
group of uh 10 men when she was
pointing at me and she said that person
he's the the cause of everyone dying
because then i could hear foul language
i could hear
abuse i could hear things like murderer
killer
uh threats like watch out watch what
happens to you
you feel uh very very frightened and
scared
no job is worth risking your life for
between april and june 2020
telecoms engineers reported 264
similar incidents so what are you laying
fiber what kind of fiber
ones you know when they turn this on
it's going to kill everyone and that's
why they're building the hospitals
no idea no idea no it's not only because
when i put it on facebook
[Music]
that's one of them what was he saying
uh tell him we don't want 5g in this
area
why are you guys hustling this man i see
him take a lot of
crap before they attacked him and they
say uh why is he putting in
5g and he says he's not 5g he's a
professional guy he's working
this thing is bigger than all of us here
because
i can find myself in a box tomorrow
because the government can kill people
if you talk too much the birds are
getting the biggest hit
because they you know they get the
radioactive they can't take certain
microwaves in their ears you know
because they're weaker than us
yeah we get we we die slowly
naveed is one of many engineers who've
been harassed
thanks to the spread of theories linking
5g and covet 19
and there's consequences one study found
that if you believe in a link
you're far more likely to leave the
house even if you have coronavirus
symptoms
the latest figures show that another 346
deaths linked to covet 19 have been
confirmed across the uk in 24 hours
bringing the total number of victims to
31 587.
it's early may a month since the
government assured the public
that 5g conspiracy theories are false
a small group of protesters have
gathered in st james's park
london their concerns range from
vaccines to freedom of speech
bill gates is saying that we have to
have mandatory vaccinations
until we all do take the vaccinations
the whole world is unlocked down
but 5g fears are what seem to unite them
there's an appeal from over 240
scientists and doctors formally
appealing to the un
asking for the stopping of 5g it's
already been stopped in a lot of cities
and countries
it was there that we met john 5g when
that gets turned up that's when they're
going to start blaming the second wave
all that kids are going to get done with
pogba radiation poisoning this ain't no
vibrancy
there is no coronavirus they're not
treating people with coronal fires they
ain't they're suppliers
[Music]
my name's john i'm a carer for my dad
i'm a personal qualified personal
trainer my spare time
i like to do boxing and train my clients
so we met you at the protest why why did
you decide to go
my concerns over 5g there is no virus in
my eyes because everywhere they're
turning on 5g
is where this so-called virus is coming
now i've had concerns over 5g for
over four or five years now vast
majority of scientists think
think that it's safe they don't they
don't that's what the media are telling
everybody
the proper scientists have come out and
said it's not safe
i know my body for 10 years it's been a
certain way
until they brought a 5g tower to around
about literally two minutes from my
house
and i've got a metal jaw and that's
that's that's been in agony i've had
headaches i've had eyeballs feel like
they're boiling i'm getting rashes
i'm getting my psoriasis has come up
when it never has
and all this has happened within five
weeks since they put a 5g tower next to
my house
i mean have you been to the doctor about
that i'm not going nowhere near an nhs
the hospitals they're murdering people
doctors get into medicine
no doctors nothing so what do you think
is really going on then
i think it's a new world order he's
pulling the strings bill gates
they're wiping people out with the
radiation
and then you're gonna come for the
children with your vaccines the same man
who wants to vaccinate us is the same
man who wants to depopulate the world
i mean vaccines stop people from getting
they don't
they don't they don't they don't there
is no virus
a lot of people have died from this no
they haven't we've been
we're being played whatever way is we're
being played
when i deal with people that are anti-5g
they're very frequently anti-vaccine
they're very frequently anti-medicine in
the conventional sense
bill gates has put an awful lot of his
work
into vaccinating people in developing
countries
and we do that because after clean water
and sanitation there is nothing that
saves more
lives and vaccination that
makes him a villain to people that are
ideologically opposed to vaccination
so to accept that 5g is secretly doing
his harm
you have to then accept that the who and
the center for disease control
and all these international health
protection bodies
are lying to us and as it goes on you
have to accept more and more to preserve
your initial belief and that drives
people deeper and deeper into i'd say
the rabbit hole
of conspiracy theories
and conspiracy theorists have turned on
people in unexpected ways
in april a pair of amateur 5g fans
noticed their website
had suddenly become a lot more popular
today i'm in
grimsby a northeast lincolnshire fishing
town
which also happens to have a 5g site in
the town
center which you'll be able to see right
behind me here
and that's the site i'm going to be
testing out today i'm jake
i'm peter and today we are in oxford
city centre to look at networks
peter and jake are 5g enthusiasts they
run a site that maps out the masts
around the country
so we're now near jublie gardens and
just to the side of
jake there is a three samsung small cell
three do actually have small cells yes
that
recently we saw a spike in um traffic to
the website
at first we were just like oh oh
our seo must be really good you know
we're at the top of the google search
results people must just be interested
in 5g
it was only when we started to look on
the stop 5g pages
that we realized it was a bit worse than
we'd actually thought
5g tower
zero g now
yeah remember when lots of celebrities
were posting about 5g
that week there were 20 arson attacks on
masts
the website traffic increased by about
three thousand percent
but some pages were
increasing in traffic by over about
fourteen thousand percent
one group in particular was
specifically titled
as a mast arson competition
and that's when we made the rather sad
decision that it was
probably best to start to
take down some of the pages
in another part of the internet one
doctor has stepped up in the fight
against misinformation
did 5g cause coronavirus people
suggested that 5g
damaged the immune system and boosted
the viruses this is not true
dr karan rangarajan is a surgeon in the
nhs
how do you know coronavirus is real
well apart from all the you know science
and medicine and
ct scans and chest x-rays and tests that
we've had to prove it exists
i've had coronavirus he's become an
online medical
myth buster 5g mobile data is
transmitted over radio waves
these radio waves are non-ionizing which
means they don't damage the dna
inside our cells unlike x-rays gamma
rays and uv
rays spread knowledge not the virus i
did a video on youtube
and on tick tock the comments which
dominated
the comment thread are all about how i'm
not a physicist which is obviously
accurate but you know you don't need to
be a physicist
to know that 5g doesn't cause
coronavirus you need to be a human with
common sense and logic the real worry is
young kids and other people who could be
for once of a better term brainwashed by
these
ludicrous theories which doesn't just
stop with five gene coronavirus
you know it goes to vaccines and then
young mothers not vaccinating their kids
you know and by not vaccinating we can
have outbreaks of these things
we don't want that it's been over seven
weeks since most people have seen their
loved ones
around 300 people have taken part in a
protest against the lockdown
but a week after the last protest there
was another
and it was much bigger tom simons was
there
the protesters gathered near speaker's
corner making few attempts to keep their
distance from one another
they opposed the government's measures
some saying that the virus was a hoax
piers corbin the brother of the former
labour leader was among those led away
it had been a while since i'd seen john
from the last protest
so i met up with him on the eve of the
final clap for carers
how's it going so how have you been
since last time absolutely still in pain
from the 5g
towers that's about it my jaw um
we have to keep going don't we instead
of clapping he's made a sign
i agree strongly with this no clapping
for the murderers
no to 5g and the radiation that comes
with it because all our kids are going
to be harmed
it's that time again loud and proud
let's all clap for our carers
while the rest of the uk were clapping
john held his cardboard i remembered
something he'd said earlier
when i spoke to you last time i think
you said you were a carer yes i'm a
carer myself
it's called clap for carers so really
they're happy for you
yeah well i don't want no one to clap
for me because
i'm a carer for my dad which i'll do for
free
i don't want no help from no government
i don't want no one to clap for me
these are the things that we should be
doing anyway the nhs
they're doing their job
[Music]
how is your dad at this moment
he's touch and go on what's happening
and how long he's got
but i've got him comfortable do you
think maybe
it might be good to spend you know the
time and effort that you're putting into
this you could be spending it with your
dad
i get that but again it comes down to
humanity
i i can't sit back and rest while i know
we are being murdered do you worry that
you're you're isolating yourself a bit
there no i'm not i was isolated away
from the world anyway
because the world has too many nasty
evil greedy people in it
so i my life hasn't changed much i don't
care what anyone thinks
i lose my own family over this i stand
by my beliefs i have
fire in my soul and i will not back down
john is one of a growing minority who
believe in the 5g
theories and that anger is having a big
impact around the country
welcome on board this avanti west coast
service
to liverpool line street
there's been nearly a hundred mass fires
since the start of lockdown
merseyside has been a hot spot
i'm not aware of us having any attacks
against
5g masts prior to the covid 19
pandemic detective chief superintendent
mark comey
has had to set up a unit dedicated to
investigating the fires
the most side police received a call
from a member of the public who had seen
three figures running away from a
telecommunications mast
and he could see that the master was on
fire
we found the partial burnt remains of a
rubber glove
when we sent that off for dna
examination a profile came back
for michael witte michael witte was
sentenced to three years in prison after
pleading guilty
to arson this is the first time we've
had a conviction
in the uk it is arson that they're
committing
it's a very serious offence this is
foolish behaviour
done by stupid people who don't
understand
the impact of what their actions are
doing
to the wider community removing a
key means of communication for people
who may be vulnerable to get in touch
with emergency services or to get in
touch with their own loved ones
it's an attack on our national
infrastructure
[Music]
today we can say
that our long national hibernation
is beginning to come to an end and life
is returning to our streets
the uk is emerging from a lockdown
infected by damaging misinformation
theories about 5g mutated and multiplied
undermining social distancing and
potentially stopping people from getting
future vaccines
meaning this conspiracy theory could
have a toxic legacy
for all of us